Week TODO:
- [x] Distribution shift primary diagnosis models (train on SCRIBE test on HUMAN, etc.)
	- [ ] Group by change in # of clinical terms / quantitative values
- [x] PCA of note embeddings (Fig 1 of How LLMs Distort Written Language)
- [ ] Versa API setup
	- [x] Primary Diagnosis Prediction
	- [ ] Rephrasing of human notes
	- [ ] Revisions of human notes
- [x] Primary Diagnosis Prediction with Phi 4
- [ ] words in scribe notes that don't appear in edits
- [ ] Prediction task setup
	- [ ] 30 day followup
	- [ ] Social determinants of health
	- [ ] # of icd codes

---
Data:
- ~31,000 encounters from Dec. 2024 - Present
	- 23,801 non-empty notes (after updates)
- 470 unique clinicians

Tables:
- Encounters
- Edit Data
- Press-Ganey Patient Feedback

Literature:
- From Abridge AI (2024): [Circumstantial Inference](https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.677/)
- [What's in a note? Unpacking predictive value in clinical notes](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5961801/pdf/2840866.pdf) (2018)
- [Adapted large language models can outperform medical experts in clinical text summarization](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-024-02855-5) (2024)
	- Evaluated correctness, conciseness, and completeness via clinician user study, as well as traditional NLP metrics like BLEU/ROUGE
- How do LLMs learn clinical information: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.15024
- How LLMs distort written language: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18161
	- How do LLMs change note quality over time? Phase 1: less diversity/stylistic flattening
	- "Our results show that using LLMs for editing leads to a large shift away from both the initial human-written drafts and the counterfactual edits that humans would have made to the same essay" - our results show a complementary finding: post-hoc human edits to clinical summaries generated by AI removes model-critical information (clinical and quantitative terms), shifting away from what would've been the human written note.
	- TODO: pre- and post- edits semantic shift using PCA (fig 1)
###### Slides
- [Preliminary data analysis](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1H8FgXKU_eoG961NX0AksXGgJ1hIDj0TALVwmNimg0iQ/edit?usp=sharing)

### irene check-ins
- Benchmark/metric of "precision"/"information" captured by a note: based on preliminary observations, seems like clinical notes don't entirely capture the long-tailed vocab distribution of clinical notes, use less quantitative (numerical) tokens and hyper-technical jargon.
	- Visualization: zipfian distribution of word/token frequencies against pre-trained tokenizer of abridge vs. human notes
		- Indicators of AI slop
	- What this could look like:
		- Benchmark of downstream classification tasks based on clinical notes only
		- Balanced metric of technical jargon to transcript faithfulness: measures 1) how precise the language in a clinical note is and 2) how accurate the content is to the ground truth transcript.
			- Perplexity-ish
		- Irene: start with "dumb", easy-to-understand rudimentary metrics
			- occurrence of numbers

---

Goal: what are indicators of AI-generated clinical notes? What implications do these markers have on the overall quality of notes?

Hypothesis: AI-generated clinical notes are less precise than human-written ones
- [x] Less frequent use of hard quantifiers (numerical values)
- [x] Reading level
- [ ] Perplexity

[FUTURE WORK] Implications: more ai-generated clinical notes --> less predictive signal for downstream classification tasks ([model collapse](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-07566-y))
- What should this setup look like?


prediction experiment setups that would make sense:
- What should the notes offer?
- What should the evaluation show?
	- Ambient scribe models are trained to optimize some set of metrics (e.g. loss on labeled dataset), but those metrics don't tell the whole story. Here are different metrics.
- QuestEval: generates questions from one text and tries to answer them using another text
- emrQA and EHRNoteQA: question templates, filled in using LLM
	- Labeled datasets
- Clinical note rubrics are subjective: [PDQI-9](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/instance/3633322/bin/ACI-03-0164-s001.pdf) and [UNC Pharm](https://faopharmacy.unc.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/200/2015/05/SOAP-Rubric-October-2012.pdf)
- Hypothesis: ai-generated notes have the potential to achieve better training data quality than human notes (structured, more templated, parsable?) assuming human-level accuracy *and* precision of information contained. We are not there yet
	- hypothesis: scribe notes are better for extraction tasks, but worse for predictive tasks 
	- Ideal outcome: ACC(f_scribe) < ACC(f_human) < ACC(f_scribe_edited)

Our setup:
- Unlabeled, reference-free dataset (one set of human-written, one set of AI generated)
- Outputs only (no access to original transcript of patient encounter)
- Have access to EHRs of patients

Task: EHR generation from clinical notes. (aka Clinical note extraction)
- Using the clinical notes for a patient only, what percentage of their EHR can we reconstruct?
- Note: hypothetical 
	- PPL-zlib ratio --> hypothesis: human notes will have higher avg. but also higher variability
	- PPL-zlib ratio is predictive of/correlates to downstream predictive task outcomes
		- Lower variability = lower signal

open questions:
- which parts of an EHR should clinical notes reasonably be expected to contain?
	- [Medications (and discontinuation)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.11137), [diagnosis code (ICD code assignment)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417424003841#:~:text=attention%20for%20multi,Blanco%20et%20al), procedures and lab information
		- Cannot use date fields ([shifted for DEID](https://wiki.library.ucsf.edu/spaces/DCDKB/pages/720388069/Safe+Harbor+and+Date+Shifting))
	- [UCSF DeID OMOP](https://ucsfonline.sharepoint.com/:x:/s/ARS/EZ7KdcdPnddPgE041UqPlY0BjO2LrqRNp_M-b42JD-Os8A?e=SuRmj0) - unified by EncounterKey
		- `procedure_occurrence`: procedure_concept_id, procedure_date, procedure_end_date, procedure_type_concept_id, procedure_source_value
		- `measurement`: 
		- `drug_exposure`: 
		- `observation`: 
		- primary diagnosis: EncounterFact.PrimaryDiagnosisKey and PrimaryDiagnosisName
- What does the model look like
	- LLM probably (versa)

go back to words that are non-overlapping between scribes and humans - for each set, cluster into types (e.g names, clinical words, doctor shorthand)
- Answer: between the scribe and human notes, what information is added and what information is lost?


1. What are the characterizable differences between human and AI generated scribe notes?
	1. Quantitative values
	2. Perplexity - mean is not so different when normalizing for note length, but variance differs greatly (not necessarily a bad thing for scribe notes)
		1. Human notes have high variance in length
	3. Scribe notes have higher reading level than human notes
2. How do these translate to the edits?
	1. ~1/3 of edits *add* a quantitative value (==TODO: but then why is the percentage of quantitative values per note the same? are they removing values too?==)
	2. Pre-edit notes have an average length of 477 words per note, edits remove a lot of information so average length is now 230 WPN (304 if excluding empty/deleted notes)
3. How do these differences translate to performance on downstream predictive tasks?
4. Can we predict whether these differences will grow over time?
	1. Human-in-the-loop vs. scribe-alone settings



clinical notes:
- use limited UMLS vocabularies
- note down the semantic type / group of the term
- incorporate abbreviations (https://conservancy.umn.edu/items/6651323b-444a-479e-a41a-abca58c2e721)
- can we merge notes to query api less?


rephrasing human notes:
- Motivation: produce high-quality notes from human-written "seed"
	- [Rephrasing the Web](https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16380)
	- [Rephrasing clinical notes](https://arxiv.org/html/2411.18940v1)
		- Best prompt: "You are a medical artificial intelligence assistant. The assistant gives truthful, detailed, and professional answers to the requests. For the following paragraph give me a paraphrase of the same in high quality professional medical English language and explain the medical terms using your medical knowledge when necessary:"
		- Following Maini et al. ([2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2411.18940v1#bib.bib22)), we apply NLTK to split clinical notes into sentences and coalesce them into chunks of approximately 300 tokens. They found asking LLMs to rephrase more than 300 tokens tends to cause information loss.
		- "In particular, we need to understand whether LLMs’ rephrasing causes subtle shifts in clinical meaning and the extent of possible hallucinations."



