#info103 

**Q1. With the onset of radio broadcasting, Herbert Hoover proclaimed that it would be “inconceivable that we should allow so great a possibility for service to be drowned in advertiser chatter.”   Using examples from the course, discuss the advantages and disadvantages of allowing advertising in newspapers and the public sphere.**

The advantages and disadvantages of allowing advertising in mass media stem from the same advantages and disadvantages of the public sphere itself. It allows for the quick dissemination of information--in this case, specifically information about new and exciting inventions---but that ultimately leads to oversaturation and the spread of untrustworthy information.

The emergence of the public sphere was revolutionary in that it allowed for the conglomeration of information sources and the sharing of ideas on. New products, ideas, and inventions were able to be brought "into one common Stock, which shall be upon all occasions expos'd to all mens use" (Sprat). Great discoveries were able to be shared with many, and it wasn't long before "a man of great sagacity" thought to manipulate this characteristic of the public sphere into "the trade of advertising" (Johnson 122). In theory, advertising is a win for both the inventor and the buyer. Inventors are able to reach wider audiences and profit more off their products, a fact which in turn incentivises innovation and drives the development of new information technologies. Buyers are more informed of what products on the market, and often times find that they are met with "more remedies than believe there are diseases" (Steele). In this instance, advertising became a medium for mutually benefical buyer-seller relationships, thus bolstering economic interests.

Now that we've established how advertising unifies the public sphere and money markets, we can begin to understand its disadvantages. The commerical opportunities found within advertising, over time, led to the "negligent perusal" of advertisements, as the public began to grow desensitized to them (Johnson 121). The only way to stand out became through the "magnificence of promises," or, too commonly, the "corrupt" practice of "[attesting] the Cure, before [publishing] or [making] an Experiment of the Prescription" (Johnson 121; Steele 57). These bad habits from an entire industry may start as some form of sensationalism, but they snowball into overall predatory business practices. There are more comical cases, like the Subway "footlong" being only 9 to 10 inches, and then there's Elizabeth Holmes, whose company's success lay solely on her ability to deceive investors and market herself. These acts are all part of the "art" of advertising, and without proper checks in place, they can be extremely harmful to consumers.

Given these attributes of advertising, I do tend to agree with President Herbert Hoover's assertion; at scale, advertising becomes a struggle for attention and a tool for market manipulation more than a method of disseminating information. 

---

**Q2. The motto of the Royal Society "Nullius in Verba" suggests that scientific evidence is better left to "speak for itself."  Using examples from the course so far, argue in favor of or in opposition to this notion.**  

Scientific evidence, as well as inventions, are better left to speak for themselves.

Too commonly when new technologies are presented, as we've seen numerous times in this course, the contributions of an invention are oversold by the inventor, which can be deceptive to people without the access to the underlying information. This happens because the parties most knowledgable about the experiment or invention at hand also have the greatest *incentive* to market it well. Take Edison, who proclaimed that his invention, the phonograph, reproduced sound “with the faultless fidelity of an instantaneous photograph” (Edison 641). Today, we're able to fact check this claim by replaying early samples produced by phonographs--what we hear are scratchy, semi-intelligable recordings covered in white noise.

As someone who is involved in the research space, one of the great things about the scientific community is the opportunity for collaboration. Today, scientific publications must be peer-reviewed and reproduced by multiple independent parties to be accepted in the scientific canon, and the seeds for such processes have been laid throughout history. Even once an "invention proves acceptable to the learned," dicoveries are constantly being built and improved upon "through the diligence of many calculators," which wouldn't be possible if people took findings as is (Napier 20-21). This much was understood by Napier in his presentation of Logarithms, and opening his invention to the collaboration and critique of others opened the doors for discovery of more efficient methods of calculating logarithms.

Letting scientific evidence "speak for itself" is not only a danger from the standpoint of information reliability, but it also hinders the development of information technology, and prevents potentially even more groundbreaking discoveries in the future.

- “Nothing is perfect at its birth” (Napier 21)


---

**Q3.  In his account of "Festina Lente," Erasmus asserts that he "must suggest a remedy" for the problems of inept and corrupt printing. Discuss the effectiveness of remedies that we have seen across the course so far to the problem of the reliability of information in the context of both past and present-day information technologies.**

The printing press is widely regarded as one of the greatest inventions of all time, for its impact on the mass dissemination of information across entire societies. Over time, printing became one of the most lucrative industries, as many publishers began to value production output over quality content. Common shortcuts included reprinting existing work from other authors or outsourcing translations and labor to "any old obscure and uneducated monks, and even to little nuns, without any attempt at choosing those suited for the work" (Erasmus 21). Governments and individuals alike have sought to remedy corrupt printing through the establishment of intellectual property protections, and by encouraging independent fact checking of published content.

At the individual level, authors like Sprat and Napier have championed for independent fact checking and the invokation of skepticism when approaching published works. Sprat, on behalf of the Royal Society, ideated that increasing access to education would allow individuals to "be able to put a mark on Errors, which have been strengthened by long prescription" (Sprat 78). He argues that individuals, who cluster together to form the general public, would be able to hold publishers accountable if only they knew better. Today, because more people have the opportunity to receive an education, and tools exist to automate this process of fact checking ("tools" being the Internet), we are better equipped to discern trustworthy sources from untrustworthy ones. These were preluded by the emergence of the public sphere, wherein people were able to question these "Seats of Knowledge." The public sphere allowed for the democratization of information, which to that point had been gatekept by "single men...Companies all of one mind...Philosophers....and devout and religious men alone" (Sprat 73). The homogeneity among people who control information makes the information susceptible to corruption. Although fake news still runs rampant today, the saturation of Internet users naturally filters out these stories before they are able to cause widespread harm...for the most part.

At the policy level, the establishment of intellectual property laws made it such that people could not profit off of or reproduce content that they didn't create. This would directly restrict aspects of lazy publishing and hoped to recalibrate the industry to once be "concentrated on accuracy in scholarly writings" (ibn-Khaldun 536). This approach is almost the complete opposite of the previous solution--the flow of information is now controlled by its creator, whereas literaries like Sprat, Napier, and Erasmus had wished for it to be opened to the general public. 

The effectiveness of solutions for corrupt printing is wholly determined by who the power of controlling the flow of information is given to. Independent verfication once again positions printing as a medium for democratizing information where it had once been perverted into a weapon for controlling the masses. Intellectual property redirects this power to the creator of medium, whatever it be. Today, these two solutions work hand in hand to address each other's shortcomings.





The Royal Society encouraged "Nullius in Verba," for individuals to verify 
- “Their purpose is, in short, to make faithful Records, of all the Works of Nature, or Art, which can come within their reach: that so the present Age, and posterity, may be able to put a mark on the Errors, which have been strengthened by long prescription: to restore the Truths, that have lain neglected: to push on those, which are already known, to more various uses: and to make the way more passable, to what remains unreveal'd” (Sprat 78)
- “the Seats of Knowledge, have been for the most part heretofore, not Laboratories, as they ought to be; but onely Scholes, where some have taught, and all the rest subscrib'd” (Sprat 68)
- “But if I shall understand that the use of this invention proves acceptable to the learned, I will, perhaps, shortly give (God willing) the philosophy, and method either of amending this Canon, or of constructing a new one upon a better plan; so that through the diligence of many calculators, a Canon more highly finished and accurate than the work of a single individual could effect may at length see the light” (Napier 20-21)
- “Nothing is perfect at its birth” (Napier 21)

